.TH STDDLL 3 "NOV 2000" "Stdutil Library" 

.SH "NAME"

stddll, stddll_construct, stddll_copy_construct, stddll_destruct, stddll_size, stddll_empty, stddll_push_front, stddll_pop_front, stddll_push_back, stddll_pop_back, stddll_multi_push_front, stddll_multi_pop_front, stddll_multi_push_back, stddll_multi_pop_back, stddll_insert, stddll_erase, stddll_repeat_insert, stddll_multi_insert, stddll_multi_erase, stddll_resize, stddll_clear, stddll_begin, stddll_end, stddll_last, stddll_get, stddll_max_size, stddll_val_size \- operations on a stddll, a list data structure

.SH "SYNOPSIS"

.B "#include <stdutil/stddll.h>"

.BI "int stddll_construct(stddll *" dll ", size_t " sizeof_val ");"

.BI "int stddll_copy_construct(stddll *" dst ", const stddll *" src ");"

.BI "void stddll_destruct(stddll *" dll ");"

.BI "size_t stddll_size(const stddll *" dll ");"

.BI "stdbool stddll_empty(const stddll *" dll ");"

.BI "int stddll_push_front(stddll *" dll ", const void *" val ");"

.BI "int stddll_pop_front(stddll *" dll ");"

.BI "int stddll_push_back(stddll *" dll ", const void *" val ");"

.BI "int stddll_pop_back(stddll *" dll ");"

.BI "int stddll_multi_push_front(stddll *" dll ", const void *" vals ", size_t " num_push ");"

.BI "int stddll_multi_pop_front(stddll *" dll ", size_t " num_pop ");"

.BI "int stddll_multi_push_back(stddll *" dll ", const void *" vals ", size_t " num_push ");"

.BI "int stddll_multi_pop_back(stddll *" dll ", size_t " num_pop ");"

.BI "stddll_it *stddll_insert(stddll_it *" it ", const void *" val ");"

.BI "stddll_it *stddll_erase(stddll_it *" it ");"

.BI "stddll_it *stddll_repeat_insert(stddll_it *" it ", const void *" val ", size_t " num_times ");"

.BI "stddll_it *stddll_multi_insert(stddll_it *" it ", const void *" vals ", size_t " num_insert ");"

.BI "stddll_it *stddll_multi_erase(stddll_it *" it ", size_t " num_erase ");"

.BI "int stddll_resize(stddll *" dll ", size_t " num_elems ");"

.BI "int stddll_clear(stddll *" dll ");"

.BI "stddll_it *stddll_begin(const stddll *" dll ", stddll_it *" it ");"

.BI "stddll_it *stddll_end(const stddll *" dll ", stddll_it *" it ");"

.BI "stddll_it *stddll_last(const stddll *" dll ", stddll_it *" it ");"

.BI "stddll_it *stddll_get(const stddll *" dll ", stddll_it *" it ", size_t " elem_num ");"

.BI "size_t stddll_max_size(const stddll *" dll ");"

.BI "size_t stddll_val_size(const stddll *" dll ");"

.SH "DESCRIPTION"

stddll is a generic data structure that contains, by value, a user
defined sequence of same sized values. The values can be referenced in
worst case linear O(n) time by their 0-based index in the sequence,
where n is the number of values in the list. This data structure is
the equivalent of a doubly linked list in other languages. This
structure is well suited to applications where insertions at arbitrary
points in a user defined sequence often occur.  Some obvious uses of a
stddll are as an efficient stack or as a FIFO queue.

Before a stddll can legally be used it must be successfully
initialized.
.B "stddll_construct"
dynamically initializes the stddll object pointed to by
.I "dll"
to contain values of size 
.I "sizeof_val"
bytes. A list initialized using this method initially contains no
values.
.B "stddll_copy_construct"
makes 
.I "dst"
contain a clone (copy by value) of the sequence of values that the
successfully initialized
.I "src"
list contains. The clone list has the same operational parameters
(i.e. - sizeof_val) as the source list. It is illegal to call a
constructor on an already successfully constructed stddll -- doing so
will cause memory leaks at best. When a list is no longer in use its
memory should be released by calling
.BR "stddll_destruct"
on it. Once a stddll has been destructed it must be successfully
initialized again before being legally used.

.B "stddll_size"
indicates the current number of values contained in the list.
.B "stddll_empty"
indicates whether or not the list contains no values.

stddll stores its values as a doubly linked (forwards and backwards)
node list, where each node is allocated independently and contains a
value. Due to this scheme stddll supports fast stack operations
(push and pop) onto both the beginning and the end of the sequence.
Push and pop operations run in linear O(m) time, where m is the number
of values being pushed or popped.
.B "stddll_push_front" 
pushes the referenced value onto the beginning of the list.
.B "stddll_pop_front"
pops the first element off of the front of the list.
.B "stddll_push_back"
pushes the referenced value onto the end of the list.
.B "stddll_pop_back"
pops the last value off of the end of the list.
.B "stddll_multi_push_front"
prepends an array of 
.I "num_push"
values onto the beginning of the list.
.B "stddll_multi_pop_front"
pops the first 
.I "num_pop"
values off of the beginning of the list.
.B "stddll_multi_push_back" 
appends an array of 
.I "num_push"
values onto the end of the list.
.B "stddll_multi_pop_back"
pops the last
.I "num_erase"
values off of the end of the list.

Because stddll stores its values in a linked node list, it supports
fast list operations (insert and erase) on the sequence in linear O(m)
time, where m is the number of values being inserted or erased.
.B "stddll_insert"
inserts the referenced value into the sequence immediately before the
value that the iterator
.I "it"
references. The passed iterator is set to point at the inserted
value. All of the old values after the insertion point have their
index in the sequence incremented by one.
.B "stddll_multi_insert"
inserts an array of
.I "num_insert" 
values into the list immediately before the value that the iterator
.I "it" 
references. The passed iterator is set to point at the first value of
the inserted values. All of the old values after the insertion point
have their index in the sequence incremented by
.IR "num_insert" .
.B "stddll_repeat_insert"
inserts the referenced value into the sequence
.I "num_times"
times immediately before the value that
.I "it"
references. The passed iterator is set to point at the first value of
the inserted values. All of the old values after the insertion point
have their index in the sequence incremented by
.IR "num_times" .

.B "stddll_erase"
erases the value that
.I "it"
references. All of the remaining values after the erased value have
their index in the sequence decremented by one. The passed iterator is
set to point at the value that shifted into the erased position, or
end if none.
.B "stddll_multi_erase"
erases the contiguous increasing subsequence of 
.I "num_erase"
values starting at and including the index/value that
.I "it"
references. All of the remaining values after the erased subsequence
have their index in the sequence decremented by
.IR "num_erase" .
The passed iterator is set to point at the value that shifted into the
beginning position of the erased subsequence, or end if none. All of
the list operations return a pointer to the passed iterator to allow
for function composition.

.B "stddll_resize"
resizes the list to contain 
.I "num_elems"
values. If 
.I "num_elems"
is smaller than the current size of the list, then this will truncate
the sequence to only contain the first
.I "num_elems"
values in the list. If 
.I "num_elems"
is larger than the current size of the list, then additional
uninitialized values will be added to the end of the sequence of
values. 
.B "stddll_clear"
deletes all of the values contained in the sequence.

stddll, like the other stdutil data structures, has several methods
for getting iterators that reference particular values in its
sequence. stddll provides bi-directional iterators (see std_it).
.B "stddll_begin"
sets the iterator 
.I "it"
to reference the first or 0th value of the list, or, if the list is
empty to reference the end of the list.
.B "stddll_end"
sets the iterator to reference the end of the list. The end of the
list is one past the last value contained in the list and has an index
of n.
.B "stddll_last"
sets the iterator to reference the nth value in the sequence (index of
n-1). It is illegal to call stddll_last on an empty list. The above
three iterator functions operate in constant O(1) time.
.B "stddll_get"
sets the iterator to reference the value with index
.I "elem_num"
or end if 
.I "elem_num"
is n.
.I "elem_num"
must be less than or equal to n. This operation runs in worst case
O(n) time and is provided only as a convenience. If the application
often references arbitrary positions in the sequence, then another
structure (such as stdarr or stdcarr) should probably be
considered. All of these functions return pointers to the passed
iterator to allow function composition.

.B "stddll_max_size"
returns the absolute maximum number of values a list can hold and is
invariant across different lists.

.B "stddll_val_size"
returns the size, in bytes, of the value type this list is currently
containing.

.SH "RETURN VALUES"

Most of the functions' return values are described in the SYNOPSIS and
cannot fail. However, the constructors and functions that potentially
affect the size of the list can fail. If such a function returns an
int, then it returns zero on success and non-zero on failure. If such
a function returns a stddll_it *, then it returns non-zero on success
and null(0) on failure. Whenever any stddll function fails it has no
side effects.

.SH "ERRORS"

The constructor functions can return the following error codes:
.RS
.TP
.B "STD_ILLEGAL_PARAM" 
the sizeof the value type was zero.

.TP
.B "STD_MEM_FAILURE"
a memory allocation failure occurred.
.RE

Functions that potentially affect the size of the list and return an
int, return the following error codes on error:
.RS
.TP
.B "STD_MEM_FAILURE"
a memory allocation failure occurred.
.RE

.SH "NOTES"

For performance reasons, by default the stdutil library does no usage
checking. It assumes the programmer knows what s/he is doing and
doesn't want additional overhead incurred from sanity checks.

However, the library can be built will several types of checks,
including bounds and initialization checks that can catch many common
programming mistakes. See the README file included with the stdutil
library distribution to see how to create such a "checked" or debug
library.

.SH "AUTHOR"

John Schultz <jschultz@cnds.jhu.edu>

.SH "SEE ALSO"

std_it, stdarr, stdcarr
