.TH STDHASH 3 "NOV 2000" "Stdutil Library" 

.SH "NAME"

stdhash, stdhash_construct, stdhash_construct2, stdhash_copy_construct, stdhash_destruct, stdhash_size, stdhash_empty, stdhash_find, stdhash_insert, stdhash_erase, stdhash_erase_key, stdhash_clear, stdhash_reserve, stdhash_rehash, stdhash_begin, stdhash_end, stdhash_last, stdhash_get, stdhash_max_size, stdhash_key_size, stdhash_val_size, stdhash_key_val_size, stdhash_it_key, stdhash_it_val, stdhash_it_kvp, stdhash_it_keyed_next \- operations on a stdhash, a dictionary data structure

.SH "SYNOPSIS"

.B "#include <stdutil/stdhash.h>"

.BI "stdhash " h " = STDHASH_STATIC_CONSTRUCT(" sizeof_key ", " sizeof_val ", " kequals ", " khcode ");"

.BI "stdhash " h " = STDHASH_STATIC_CONSTRUCT2(" sizeof_key ", " sizeof_val ", " kequals ", " khcode ", " dseed ");"

.BI "int stdhash_construct(stdhash *" h ", size_t " sizeof_key ", size_t " sizeof_val ", stdequals_fcn " kequals ", stdhcode_fcn " khcode ");"

.BI "int stdhash_construct2(stdhash *" h ", size_t " sizeof_key ", size_t " sizeof_val ", stdequals_fcn " kequals ", stdhcode_fcn " khcode ", size_t " dseed ");"

.BI "int stdhash_copy_construct(stdhash *" dst ", const stdhash *" src ");"

.BI "void stdhash_destruct(stdhash *" h ");"

.BI "size_t stdhash_size(const stdhash *" h ");"

.BI "stdbool stdhash_empty(const stdhash *" h ");"

.BI "stdhash_it *stdhash_find(const stdhash *" h ", stdhash_it *" it ", const void *" key ");"

.BI "stdhash_it *stdhash_insert(stdhash *" h ", stdhash_it *" it ", const void *" key ", const void *" val ");"

.BI "stdhash_it *stdhash_erase(stdhash_it *" it ");"

.BI "int stdhash_erase_key(stdhash *" h ", const void *" key ");"

.BI "int stdhash_clear(stdhash *" h ");"

.BI "int stdhash_reserve(stdhash *" h ", size_t " num_elems ");"

.BI "int stdhash_rehash(stdhash *" h ");"

.BI "stdhash_it *stdhash_begin(const stdhash *" h ", stdhash_it *" it ");"

.BI "stdhash_it *stdhash_end(const stdhash *" h ", stdhash_it *" it ");"

.BI "stdhash_it *stdhash_last(const stdhash *" h ", stdhash_it *" it ");"

.BI "stdhash_it *stdhash_get(const stdhash *" h ", stdhash_it *" it ", size_t " elem_num ");"

.BI "void *stdhash_it_key(const stdhash_it *" it ");"

.BI "void *stdhash_it_val(const stdhash_it *" it ");"

.BI "stdkvp *stdhash_it_kvp(const stdhash_it *" it ");"

.BI "stdhash_it *stdhash_it_keyed_next(stdhash_it *" it ");"

.BI "size_t stdhash_max_size(const stdhash *" h ");"

.BI "size_t stdhash_key_size(const stdhash *" h ");"

.BI "size_t stdhash_val_size(const stdhash *" h ");"

.BI "size_t stdhash_key_val_size(const stdhash *" h ");"

.SH "DESCRIPTION"

stdhash is a generic data structure that contains, by value, a
collection of same-sized key-val pairs, where the keys remain constant
while in the stdhash. These pairs can be referenced in expected
constant O(1) time, worst case linear O(n) time (where n is the number
of pairs in the hash), by their non-unique keys. This data structure
is the equivalent of a dynamic, non-unique key dictionary or multihash
in other languages. One can construct a stdhash to only contain key
types. In that case, the stdhash acts as a collection of non-unique
keys. This can be useful to test for key existence (e.g. - does the
hash contain 5?). This structure is well suited to applications where
quick look-ups based on a key often occur and long structural updates
can be occasionaly tolerated.

Before a stdhash can legally be used it must be successfully
initialized. The user must specify the size of the key and value types
to be stored. Values can be zero bytes in size. In addition, the user
can specify two functions that will be used to compare keys. The first
function is an equality tester for keys: it invariantly returns
stdtrue (1) if the keys are equal and stdfalse (0) if the keys are not
equal -- it should be a reflexive, symmetric and transitive relation
on keys. The second function is a hashcode function that takes a
pointer to a key and invariantly returns a size_t that represents the
key as a size_t. This hashcode fcn must be consistent with the
equality function, meaning that if two keys are equal then they must
have the same hashcode. It is legal for two unequal keys to return the
same hashcode, however, such hashcode collisions should occur with a
probability of approximately 1 / (2^(sizeof(size_t) * 8)) for optimal
performance.

If the key type being stored is appropriate, the user can specify
null (0) for either, or both, of the key comparison functions. In this
case, a bitwise memory comparison is done for key equality and the
hashcodes are computed as a function of the bits of the constant key.

In addition, upon initialization a stdhash is given a seed number that
it uses to generate random numbers. Two stdhashs that start with the
same seeds and are modified in the exact same manner will be
synchronized in terms of the key-val pairs and the sequence of those
pairs that they contain.

.BI "STDHASH_STATIC_CONSTRUCT"
is a macro that initializes the assigned stdhash at definition to
contain key-val pairs with keys of size
.I "sizeof_key"
bytes and values of 
.I "sizeof_val"
bytes. The keys will be compared for equality using the function 
.I "kequals"
and key hashcodes will be computed using the function 
.IR "khcode" .
stdhashs constructed this way will be initialized with the same
constant seed.
.BI "STDHASH_STATIC_CONSTRUCT2"
is the same as 
.B "STDHASH_STATIC_CONSTRUCT"
except that the caller may specify a different seed with which to
initialize the stdhash instead of the default seed.
.B "stdhash_construct"
dynamically initializes the stdhash object pointed to by
.I "h"
to contain key-val pairs with keys of size
.I "sizeof_key"
bytes and values of
.I "sizeof_val"
bytes. The keys will be compared for equality using the function
.I "kequals"
and key hashcodes will be computed using the function
.IR "khcode" .
stdhashs constructed this way will be initialized with a seed that is
based on the current time on the system.
.B "stdhash_construct2"
works the same way as
.B "stdhash_construct"
except that the seed,
is explicitly given by the caller as
.IR "dseed" . 
stdhashs initialized using any of these methods initially contain no
key-val pairs.
.B "stdhash_copy_construct"
makes 
.I "dst"
contain a clone (copy by value) of the sequence of key-val pairs that
the successfully initialized
.I "src"
stdhash contains. The cloned stdhash has the same operational parameters
(i.e. - sizeof_key, sizeof_val, key_equals, key_hcode, rand_seed) as
the source stdhash. It is illegal to call a constructor on an already
successfully constructed stdhash -- doing so will cause memory leaks
at best. When a stdhash is no longer in use its memory should be
released by calling
.B "stdhash_destruct"
on it. Once a stdhash has been destructed it must be initialized again
before being legally reused.

.B "stdhash_size"
indicates the current number of key-vals contained in the stdhash.
.B "stdhash_empty"
indicates whether or not the stdhash contains no key-vals.

stdhash stores its values in a contiguous slab of memory. Due to
this scheme, stdhash supports expected O(1) find, insert and erase
operations of key-vals. However, insert and erase operations that
require reallocation of the table will run in O(n) time and,
technically, with vanishingly small probability, find operations can
run in O(n) time.
.B "stdhash_find"
finds the first instance of the key
.I "key"
in the table and points the iterator 
.I "it"
at that key-val pair.
.B "stdhash_insert"
inserts the key-val pair (
.IR "key" ,
.IR "value" )
into the table and points 
.I "it"
at the newly inserted pair. Note, that this insertion 
.B "DOES NOT" 
overwrite any other pairs with an equal key. In addtion, the caller
can pass a null (0) pointer for
.IR "it" .
However, if the caller does this, there will be no way to detect
if the insertion fails, so this is not recommended.
.B "stdhash_erase"
erases the key-val pair at which 
.I "it"
is pointing. After the erasure
.I "it"
is pointed at the beginning of the stdhash.
.B "stdhash_erase_key"
erases all key-val pairs that have a key equal to
.IR "key" .
It returns the number of key-val pairs that were erased.

.B "stdhash_clear"
erases all of the key-val pairs contained in the stdhash.
.B "stdhash_reserve"
reserves enough memory to contain
.I "num_elems"
key-val pairs without requiring a reallocation.
.B "stdhash_rehash"
can be called to reallocate the table to its most appropriate size and
to potentially increase the performance of the table.

stdhash is mainly used as a lookup table. However, it also contains
a sequence of values. At any particular point between structural
operations, each of the key-val pairs can be assigned a rank [0, n)
just like the sequence stdutil data structures. However, unlike the
sequence data structures this sequence appears random in nature and
can change in a drastic and apparently random fashion upon structural
changes. Like the other stdutil data structures, stdhash has several
methods for getting iterators that reference particular values in its
sequence. stdhash provides bi-directional iterators (see std_it).
.B "stdhash_begin"
sets the iterator 
.I "it"
to reference the first, or 0th, value of the stdhash, or, if the
stdhash is empty to reference the end of the stdhash. The end of the
stdhash is one past the last value it contains.
.B "stdhash_end"
sets the iterator to reference the end of the stdhash. 
.B "stdhash_last"
sets the iterator to reference the last value in the sequence. It is
illegal to call stdhash_last on an empty stdhash. The above three
iterator functions operate in constant O(1) time.
.B "stdhash_get"
sets the iterator to reference the value with index
.I "elem_num"
or end if 
.I "elem_num"
is n.
.I "elem_num"
must be less than or equal to n. This operation runs in O(n) time and
is provided only as a convenience. If the application often references
arbitrary positions in the sequence, then another structure (such as
stdarr or stdcarr) should probably be considered. All of these
functions return pointers to the passed iterator to allow function
composition.

stdhash iterators provide functionality that is slightly different
and beyond the ``normal'' iterator functions (see std_it).
.B "stdhash_it_key"
returns a pointer to the key of the key-val pair to which
.I "it"
is referencing.
.B "stdhash_it_val"
returns a pointer to the value of the key-val pair to which
.I "it"
is referencing. Note, that it 
.B "DOES NOT"
provide a pointer to the whole key-val pair as you might expect.
.B "stdhash_it_kvp"
returns a pointer to the struct stdkvp (see stdutil/stdkvp.h) that
contains the entire key-val pair to which
.I "it"
is referencing.
.B "stdhash_it_keyed_next"
moves the iterator to reference the next key-val pair that has a key
equal to the key to which
.I "it"
is currently referencing. If no such key-val pair exists then
.I "it"
will reference the end of the stdhash. This function allows you, for a
given key, to iterate through all the duplicate keys in the
stdhash. For example, let's say you had a stdhash that used ints as
its key type and C strings as its values. Let's say you then inserted
the key-val pairs: (5, "Hello") (5, "World"), (5, "!"). Then if you
did a
.B "stdhash_find"
for 5, it would return an iterator to whichever of the 3 key-val pairs
was ``first'', as defined by the stdhash (this is invariant between
structural changes) and the key. Then if you did
.B "stdhash_it_keyed_next"
on that iterator it would move the iterator to reference the
``second'' of those pairs as defined by the stdhash and the key
(invariant between structural changes). If you did it one more time,
then
.B "stdhash_it_keyed_next"
would move the iterator to reference the ``last'' of those pairs as
defined by the stdhash and the key. If you called it one more time it
would advance the iterator to point at the end of the stdhash. Also,
if you got an iterator to the ``last'' key-val pair through some other
method (e.g. - 
.BR "stdhash_get" ) 
and then called 
.B "stdhash_it_keyed_next"
it would move the iterator to reference the end of the
stdhash. Duplicate keys define a sort of mini-sequence of themselves
within the stdhash. This sequence currently can only be iterated
through
.BR "stdhash_it_keyed_next" .

.B "stdhash_max_size"
returns the absolute maximum number of key-val pairs stdhash can hold
and is invariant across different stdhashs.
.B "stdhash_key_size"
returns the size, in bytes, of the key type this stdhash is currently
containing.
.B "stdhash_val_size"
returns the size, in bytes, of the value type this stdhash is
currently containing.
.B "stdhash_key_val_size"
returns the size, in bytes, of the key-value type struct stdkvp (see
stdkvp.h) that contains the key-val pair.

.SH "RETURN VALUES"

Most of the functions' return values are described in the SYNOPSIS and
cannot fail. However, the constructors and functions that potentially
affect the size of the stdhash can fail. If such a function returns an
int, then it returns zero on success and non-zero on failure (except
for
.BR "stdhash_erase_key" ). 
If such a function returns a stdhash_it *, then it returns non-zero
on success and null(0) on failure. Whenever any stdhash function fails
it has no side effects.

.SH "ERRORS"

The constructor functions can return the following error codes:
.RS
.TP
.B "STD_ILLEGAL_PARAM" 
the sizeof the key type was zero.

.TP
.B "STD_MEM_FAILURE"
a memory allocation failure occurred.
.RE

Functions that potentially affect the size of the stdhash and return
an int, return the following error codes on error:
.RS
.TP
.B "STD_MEM_FAILURE"
a memory allocation failure occurred.
.RE

.SH "NOTES"

For performance reasons, by default the stdutil library does no usage
checking. It assumes the programmer knows what s/he is doing and
doesn't want additional overhead incurred from sanity checks.

However, the library can be built will several types of checks,
including bounds and initialization checks that can catch many common
programming mistakes. See the README file included with the stdutil
library distribution to see how to create such a "checked" or debug
library.

.SH "AUTHOR"

John Schultz <jschultz@cnds.jhu.edu>

.SH "SEE ALSO"

std_it
